


DKIM Working Group                                          M. Kucherawy
March 28, 2011                                                 Cloudmark


                     RFC4871 Implementation Report

Abstract

   This document contains an implementation report for the IESG covering
   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) in support of the advancement of
   that specification along the Standards Track.


1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM), published in May 2007, has reached
   a level of maturity sufficient to consider its advancement along the
   standards track.  Enclosed is a summary of collected interoperability
   data provided from sources that are aggregating such information as
   well as from a more formal DKIM interoperability event that took
   place in October 2007.


2.  Definitions

   DomainKeys Identified Mail is defined in [DKIM].

   Various terms specific to email are used in this document.  Their
   definitions and further discussion can be found in [EMAIL-ARCH].


3.  DKIM Interoperability Event

   In October 2007, Alt-N Technologies of Dallas, Texas hosted an
   interoperability and testing event at their headquarters.  Twenty
   organizations sent engineers and their various DKIM implementations
   to connect to a private internal network and exchange test messages
   and tabulate observed results.

3.1.  Participants

   The interoperability event included participants from all of the
   following organizations: Alt-N Technologies, AOL Inc., AT&T
   Laboratories, Bizanga Ltd., Brandenburg InternetWorking, Brandmail
   Solutions, ColdSpark, Constant Contact, Inc., DKIMproxy, Domain
   Assurance Council, Google Inc., ICONIX Inc., Internet Initiative
   Japan (IIJ), Ironport Systems, Message Systems, Port25 Solutions,
   Postfix, Sendmail, Inc., StrongMail Systems, and Yahoo!  Inc. Most of
   the participants traveled to Dallas and participated in person, but a
   few operated remotely.

   Nearly all of the implementations were based on disjoint code
   development projects.  A few were based on a common open source base
   project.

3.2.  Testing Methodology

   Participants were encouraged before the event to craft a set of test
   messages meant to exercise their own implementations as well as those
   of the other participants, both in terms of successful verifications
   as well as some expected to fail.  Test cases were developed with the
   intent of confounding verifiers that may not have implemented the
   [ABNF] of [DKIM] correctly.

   The participants set up Mail Transfer Agents (MTAs) equipped with
   their own DKIM signing and verifying modules, and their own tools to
   generate mail to be signed along with tools to analyze the results
   post-verification.  They then sent their own batteries of test
   messages, looking for both expected and unexpected failures in
   response.  Some implementations included "auto-responders" that would
   reply with verification results, while others simply collected the
   results that would then be shared manually.

3.3.  Observations

   All of the packages implemented all of the required portions of
   [DKIM] in terms of both signature and key features.  Most of the
   packages implemented all of the optional features of both signatures
   and keys.  There were at least two implementations of each optional
   feature.

   The interoperability testing was largely successful.  As might be
   expected, there were many verification false negatives or false
   positives that were the result of bugs in corner cases of some of the
   implementations presented for testing.  In such cases the developers
   were able to identify the issue as resulting from their own mis-
   reading of the specification and not an error in the specification
   itself.

   Several of the failures did occur as a result of specification
   ambiguities.  The participants discussed each of these in turn and
   were able to come to consensus on how they believed the specification
   should be changed to resolve them.

   The participants agreed to keep the results about the specific tests
   private.  Accordingly, those data are not presented here.

3.4.  Results

   The handful of interoperability issues described above that referred
   to weaknesses or ambiguities in [DKIM] resulted in several errata
   being opened via the RFC Editor web site.  These are being addressed
   in an RFC4871bis draft effort that is now starting from within the
   DKIM working group.

   The errata items, in summary:

   o  explicit canonicalized forms of empty bodies for each
      canonicalization method, along with their SHA1 and SHA256 hash
      values (errata #1376 and #1377)

   o  clarification about normative text regarding the "a=" tag (errata
      #1378)

   o  ABNF corrections regarding the "z=" tag (errata #1379)

   o  informative discussion regarding the "x=" tag (errata #1380)

   o  normative clarifications about "q=", "h=", "k=", "s=" and "t="
      tags (errata #1381 and #1382)

   o  correction of "g=" description to match its ABNF (errata #1383)

   o  clarifications about "relaxed" body canonicalization (errata
      #1384)

   o  correction to the signature example (errata #1386)

   o  ABNF corrections regarding the "h=" tag (errata #1461)

   o  ABNF corrections regarding the "v=" tag (errata #1487)

   o  discussion of DomainKeys compatibility (errata #1532)

   o  discussion about what constitutes the actual value of the "b=" tag
      (errata #1596)


4.  Collected DKIM Interoperability and Use Data

   Several implementations are collecting private data about DKIM use,
   signature survivability, which properties of the base specification
   are observed in public use, etc.  This section includes collection
   methods and summary reports provided by those implementations.

4.1.  The OpenDKIM Project

   The OpenDKIM Project (http://www.opendkim.org) is an open source
   project providing a DKIM support library, an email filter for use
   with Mail Transfer Agents (MTAs), and a set of tools to assist with
   deployment of DKIM.

4.1.1.  Details

   Recent releases have included an optional feature to record
   statistics about messages with and without DKIM signatures.  Sites
   enabling this feature can choose to share the data with the project's
   development team as part of this interoperability report work.  The
   data can be anonymized to conceal the sending domain and client IP
   addresses, though these data are passed through a one-way hash to
   enable collation of data from common sources.

4.1.2.  Results

   At the time of writing of this document, seven months of data had
   been collected.  The results of this effort are as follows:

   Reporting Hosts:  21 individual MTAs representing nine distinct ADMDs

   Total Messages:  11367042

   Signatures:  8146244 messages (71.7%) were not signed; 3186313
      (28.0%) had one signature; 34156 (0.3%) had two signatures; the
      remainder (less than 0.01%) had more.

   Signing Algorithms:  53.4% of signatures used "rsa-sha1", while the
      balance used "rsa-sha256".

   Header Canonicalization Algorithms:  14.8% of signatures used
      "simple", while the balance used "relaxed"; when grouped by
      domains, 11.8% of domains used "simple" while the balance used
      "relaxed".

   Body Canonicalization Algorithms:  26.2% of signatures used "simple",
      while the balance used "relaxed"; 19.1% of observed signing
      domains used "simple" while the balance used "relaxed".

   Keys in Test Mode:  54.5% of keys retrieved from the DNS were tagged
      as being in test mode.

   Keys with Specific Granularity:  434 keys were retrieved that had
      specific names in their "g=" tags.

   Keys with Syntax Errors:  Less than 0.1% of keys retrieved from the
      DNS had syntax errors.

   DomainKeys Compatibility:  1% of the retrieved keys appeared to be
      intended for use with the older DomainKeys proposal rather than
      DKIM

   AUID use:  49.8% of signatures did not contain an explicit AUID ("i="
      value).  Of those that did, 89.4% used a domain matching the SDID
      ("d=" value).  Across all "i=" tags present, 43.6% provided no
      local-part, 52.8% included a local-part matching the one found in
      the From: field, and the remainder had a different local-part.

   Missing Keys:  2.1% of signatures received referenced keys that were
      not found in the DNS

   Optional Signature Tags:  Of the optional signature tags supported by
      the base specification, "t=" was seen 45.3% of the time, "x=" was
      seen 3.4% of the time; "l=" was seen 3.7 of the time; "z=" was
      seen 5.9% of the time.  (The "z=" statistic is likely inflated due
      to the nature of the sampling.)

   Body Length Limits:  Of the signatures for which "l=" was used, 11.9%
      of them signed none of the body, and 92.5% of the rest had the
      body extended after signing.

   Signature Pass Rates:  Overall, 92.3% of observed signatures were
      successfully verified.

   Pass Rates for Non-List Mail:  Where "list mail" is defined as any
      mail bearing one of the header fields defined in [LIST-ID] or in
      [LIST-URLS], or a "Precedence: list" field, selecting only for
      mail that is not list mail revealed a successful verification rate
      of 93.5%; selecting only for list mail produced a 90.5% success
      rate.

   DNSSEC:  There has been scant but detectable uptake in the checking
      of whether or not DKIM or ADSP records in the DNS are protected by
      DNSSEC.

   Common errors:  The top five verification errors observed: Key not
      found in DNS (28.3%), key granularity mismatch (13.8%), DNS
      retrieval failure such as timeouts (10.6%), key type unknown
      (2.3%), key timestamp is in in the future (2.2%).

   Detected Header Field Changes:  A subset of the reporting sites are
      capable of reporting header fields known to have been changed in
      transit (e.g. when "z=" tags were used by the signer).  In such
      cases, changes to the "To:" field were more common than any other
      by more than an order of magnitude.

   Most Commonly Signed Fields:  From: (100%), Subject: (95.8%), Date:
      (95.6%), To: (95.4%), MIME-Version: (92.9%), Content-Type:
      (85.0%), Message-Id: (75.6%), Reply-To: (43.8%), Received:
      (35.2%), List-Unsubscribe: (31.3%).  All others are below 30%.

   Identities:  76% of the signatures observed included a "d=" value
      matching the domain in the From: field.

   Low-use Signing Domains:  50942 unique signing domains were observed.
      Of these, 26% of them sent a single signed message in the sample
      period, 14.4% sent two and 8.3% sent three.

4.1.3.  Conclusions

   The results of the OpenDKIM work are updated constantly as more data
   feeds come online and more data are reported.  Based on the data
   available at the time of writing, some conclusions are possible.

   At least some implementations of all of the optional signature
   features, all of the canonicalization combinations and all of the
   signing algorithms are in general use.  None of the features had zero
   use counts.

   Overall signature pass rates are generally quite high.  The impact of
   signature survivability when correlated against Mailing List Manager
   (MLM) activity is detectable based on observed data.  More research
   into this is recommended.  The DKIM Working Group is already working
   on an Informational draft to discuss those issues.

   That the "To" field is the one most often associated with
   verification failures suggests some MTAs handling the message are
   correcting cases where the field is improperly formed.  A common case
   is failing to quote the comment portion of that field when required
   to do so by [MAIL].  Such corrections cause signatures to become
   invalid.  The working group may want to consider revising Section 5.5
   of [DKIM] to either reduce the list of recommended header fields for
   signature content or provide some additional text warning of this
   potential issue.

   The high counts (i.e., nearly half) of low-use signing domains
   suggest that spammers, who typically rotate domain names with high
   frequency, have adopted DKIM as a tool to try to get through message
   filters.

4.2.  AOL, Inc. Data

   A one-day summary of observed traffic from AOL, Inc. reports the
   following:

   Ratio of DKIM-signed mail:  42%

   Properly formed signatures:  1.4 billion

   Malformed signatures:  3000

   Unique signing domains:  50,000-90,000

   Key retrieval errors:  14 million (1%)

   Signature refers to nonexistent domain:  10 million (0.7%)

   Signature refers to nonexistent key:  36 million (2.5%)

   Signature refers to revoked key:  138,000 (~0% )

   Verified signatures:  1.2 billion (85.7%)

   AUID matches From: domain:  1.2 billion (85.7%)

   Failed signatures (body changed):  78 million (5.6%)

   Failed signatures (other):  34 million (2.4%)

   Expired signatures:  less than 1 million (~0%)

4.3.  Google Mail Data

   Google Mail reports the following:

   Unsigned mail:  72.1%

   AUID matches From: domain:  68.7%

   Signed mail that verified:  14.7%

   Signed mail that verified in test mode:  11.7%

   Signed mail that failed:  0.2%

   Signed mail that failed in test mode:  0.2%

   Body hash mismatch:  0.5%

   Signature missing required parameters:  0.3%

   Granularity mismatch:  0.2%

   These data are reported based on an implementation that only
   evaluates one signature per message.

   All other reportable anomalies occurred in vanishingly small
   percentages.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [DKIM]     Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.

   [EMAIL-ARCH]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", RFC 5598,
              July 2009.

5.2.  Informative References

   [ABNF]     Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [LIST-ID]  Chandhok, R. and G. Wenger, "List-Id: A Structured Field
              and Namespace for the Identification of Mailing Lists",
              RFC 2919, March 2001.

   [LIST-URLS]
              Neufeld, G. and J. Baer, "The Use of URLs as Meta-Syntax
              for Core Mail List Commands and their Transport through
              Message Header Fields", RFC 2369, July 1998.

   [MAIL]     Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to acknowledge the following for their review and
   constructive criticism of this document: Dave Crocker, Tony Hansen,
   Jeff Macdonald, S. Moonesamy and Rolf Sonneveld.

   The author also wishes to acknowledge Margot Koschier of AOL, Inc.,
   Monica Chew of Google, and the members of The OpenDKIM Project for
   providing data used in this report.

   The working group expresses its profound thanks to Alt-N Technologies
   for graciously hosting the 2007 DKIM interoperability event.


Author's Address

   Murray S. Kucherawy
   Cloudmark
   128 King St., 2nd Floor
   San Francisco, CA  94107
   US

   Phone: +1 415 946 3800
   Email: msk@cloudmark.com

